`implementing-dispose.md`:  Better illustration of SafeHandles (#45173)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/garbage-collection/implementing-dispose.md

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../samples/snippets/csharp/VS_Snippets_CLR/conceptual.disposable/cs/Foo.cs":::
:::code language="vb" source="../../../samples/snippets/visualbasic/VS_Snippets_CLR/conceptual.disposable/vb/Foo.vb":::

> [!TIP]
>
> - If your class has an <xref:System.IDisposable> field or property but doesn't *own* it, then the class doesn't need to implement <xref:System.IDisposable>. Typically a class creating and storing the <xref:System.IDisposable> child object also becomes the owner, but in some cases the ownership can be transferred to another <xref:System.IDisposable> type.

> > - There are cases when you may want to perform `null`-checking in a finalizer (which includes the `Dispose(false)` method invoked by a finalizer). One of the primary reasons is if you're unsure whether the instance got fully initialized (for example, an exception might be thrown in a constructor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - There are cases when you might want to perform `null`-checking in a finalizer (which includes the `Dispose(false)` method invoked by a finalizer). One of the primary reasons is if you're unsure whether the instance got fully initialized (for example, an exception might be thrown in a constructor).
```

If the method call comes from a finalizer, only the code that frees unmanaged resources should execute. The implementer is responsible for ensuring that the false path doesn't interact with managed objects that may have been disposed. This is important because the order in which the garbage collector disposes managed objects during finalization is nondeterministic.

## Implement the dispose pattern

All non-sealed classes (or Visual Basic classes not modified as `NotInheritable`) should be considered a potential base class, because they could be inherited. If you implement the dispose pattern for any potential base class, you must add the following methods to your class:

- A <xref:System.IDisposable.Dispose%2A> implementation that calls the `Dispose(bool)` method.
- A `Dispose(bool)` method that performs the actual cleanup.

> - If your class deals with unmanaged resources either provide an override to the <xref:System.Object.Finalize%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method, or wrap the unmanaged resource in a <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your class deals with unmanaged resources, either provide an override to the <xref:System.Object.Finalize%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method or wrap the unmanaged resource in a <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle>.
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> A finalizer (a <xref:System.Object.Finalize%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> override) is only required if you directly reference unmanaged resources. This is a highly advanced scenario that can be typically avoided:
>

> > 1. **If your class references only managed objects**, it's still possible for the class to implement the dispose pattern. There is no need to implement a finalizer in such cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - **If your class references only managed objects**, it's still possible for the class to implement the dispose pattern. There's no need to implement a finalizer.
```

> > 1. **If you need to deal with unmanaged resources** we strongly recommend to wrap the unmanaged <xref:System.IntPtr> handle into a <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle>. The <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle> provides a finalizer so you don't have to write one yourself. See the [Safe handles](#safe-handles) paragraph for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - **If you need to deal with unmanaged resources**, we strongly recommend wrapping the unmanaged <xref:System.IntPtr> handle into a <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle>. The <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle> provides a finalizer so you don't have to write one yourself. For more information, see the [Safe handles](#safe-handles) paragraph.
```

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../samples/snippets/csharp/VS_Snippets_CLR_System/system.idisposable/cs/derived2.cs":::
:::code language="vb" source="../../../samples/snippets/visualbasic/VS_Snippets_CLR_System/system.idisposable/vb/derived2.vb":::

## Safe handles

Writing code for an object's finalizer is a complex task that can cause problems if not done correctly. Therefore, we recommend that you construct <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle?displayProperty=nameWithType> objects instead of implementing a finalizer.

A <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle?displayProperty=nameWithType> is an abstract managed type that wraps an <xref:System.IntPtr?displayProperty=nameWithType> that identifies an unmanaged resource. On Windows it might identify a handle, and on Unix, a file descriptor. The `SafeHandle` provides all of the logic necessary to ensure that this resource is released once and only once, either when the `SafeHandle` is disposed of or when all references to the `SafeHandle` have been dropped and the `SafeHandle` instance is finalized.

> The <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle?displayProperty=nameWithType> is an abstract base class. Derived classes provide specific instances for different kinds of handle. These derived classes validate what values for the <xref:System.IntPtr?displayProperty=nameWithType> are considered invalid and how to actually free the handle. For example, <xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeFileHandle> derives from `SafeHandle` to wrap `IntPtrs` that identify open file handles/descriptors, and overrides its <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle.ReleaseHandle?displayProperty=nameWithType> method to close it (via the `close` function on Unix or `CloseHandle` function on Windows). Most APIs in .NET libraries that create an unmanaged resource wraps it in a `SafeHandle` and return that `SafeHandle` to you as needed, rather than handing back the raw pointer. In situations where you interact with an unmanaged component and get an `IntPtr` for an unmanaged resource, you can create your own `SafeHandle` type to wrap it. As a result, few non-`SafeHandle` types need to implement finalizers. Most disposable pattern implementations only end up wrapping other managed resources, some of which may be `SafeHandle` objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle?displayProperty=nameWithType> is an abstract base class. Derived classes provide specific instances for different kinds of handle. These derived classes validate what values for the <xref:System.IntPtr?displayProperty=nameWithType> are considered invalid and how to actually free the handle. For example, <xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeFileHandle> derives from `SafeHandle` to wrap `IntPtrs` that identify open file handles and descriptors, and overrides its <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle.ReleaseHandle?displayProperty=nameWithType> method to close it (via the `close` function on Unix or `CloseHandle` function on Windows). Most APIs in .NET libraries that create an unmanaged resource wrap it in a `SafeHandle` and return that `SafeHandle` to you as needed, rather than handing back the raw pointer. In situations where you interact with an unmanaged component and get an `IntPtr` for an unmanaged resource, you can create your own `SafeHandle` type to wrap it. As a result, few non-`SafeHandle` types need to implement finalizers. Most disposable pattern implementations only end up wrapping other managed resources, some of which might be `SafeHandle` objects.
```

Reviewer: wraps -> wrap it in a `SafeHandle`...

### Implement the dispose pattern using a custom safe handle

The following code demonstrates how to handle unmanaged resources by implementing a <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle>.

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../samples/snippets/csharp/VS_Snippets_CLR_System/system.idisposable/cs/safe.cs":::
:::code language="vb" source="../../../samples/snippets/visualbasic/VS_Snippets_CLR_System/system.idisposable/vb/safe.vb":::

> [!NOTE]

> > The behavior of the `DisposableBaseWithSafeHandle` class is equivalent to the beahavior of the [`DisposableBaseWithFinalizer` class in a previous example](#base-class-with-unmanaged-resources), however the approach demonstrated in the current paragraph is safer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The behavior of the `DisposableBaseWithSafeHandle` class is equivalent to the behavior of the [`DisposableBaseWithFinalizer` class in a previous example](#base-class-with-unmanaged-resources), however the approach demonstrated here is safer:
```

>

> > - There is no need to implement a finalizer, <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle> will take care of finalization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - There is no need to implement a finalizer, because <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle> will take care of finalization.
```

> > - There is no need for synchronization to guarantee thread-safety. Even though there is a race condition in the `Dispose` implementation of `DisposableBaseWithSafeHandle`, <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle> guarantees that <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle.ReleaseHandle%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> will be only called once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - There is no need for synchronization to guarantee thread safety. Even though there is a race condition in the `Dispose` implementation of `DisposableBaseWithSafeHandle`, <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle> guarantees that <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.SafeHandle.ReleaseHandle%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> will be called only once.
```

### Built-in safe handles in .NET

The following derived classes in the <xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles> namespace provide safe handles.

| Class | Resources it holds |
| - | - |
| <xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeFileHandle><br/><xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeMemoryMappedFileHandle><br/><xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafePipeHandle> | Files, memory mapped files, and pipes |
| <xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeMemoryMappedViewHandle> | Memory views |

> | <xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeNCryptKeyHandle><br/><xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeNCryptProviderHandle><br/><xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeNCryptSecretHandle> |Cryptography constructs |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| <xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeNCryptKeyHandle><br/><xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeNCryptProviderHandle><br/><xref:Microsoft.Win32.SafeHandles.SafeNCryptSecretHandle> | Cryptography constructs |
```
